---
title: Doxygen
---

# Doxygen

IXM provides a wrapper `Doxygen` package that provides a more powerful feature
set for cross target and cross project Doxygen generation. Additionally, unlike
CMake's `Doxygen` package, it relies on target properties instead of scoped
variables, which allows users to use both generator expressions, as well as
have per-target settings.

This `find_package` module wraps the CMake `find_package` module, so using the
IXM module does not cause any issues for backwards compatibility as long as
users are not relying on already documented deprecated behavior.

## Usage

Use this module as you normally would. However, ensure that IXM is at the
*front* of your `CMAKE_MODULE_PATH` when calling `find_package(Doxygen)` in
a given directory.

```cmake
find_package(Doxygen ...)
```

Use the commands and properties mentioned below to create and modify a doxygen
target.

## Commands

### `add_doxygen_target`

This creates a target that can be referred to directly with `set_property` and
`set_target_properties`. When building, this will read a predefined set of
inputs as well as inputs provided by the user, and generate documentation via
the `Doxygen::doxygen` target.

To add additional inputs to the target, simply use the builtin CMake
`target_sources` command. This command can take directories as well as sources
and will *just work* as a result.

> [!WARNING]
>This command uses `add_custom_target` internally, which does not permit
>creating alias targets, nor does it permit creating "scoped" targets (e.g.,
>`${PROJECT_NAME}::docs`) as a result, *all names* passed to this command *must*
>be globally unique.

#### Required Parameters {#add-doxygen-target-required-parameters}

`target`
: name of the target you wish to create.

#### Keyword Parameters {#add-doxygen-target/keyword}

`ALL`
: Add this target to the `all` target dependency.

`INPUT`
: Path to a file to use as the input template. This file is passed to
  `file(GENERATE)` from CMake with the `target` as the `TARGET` context. This
  file can contain generator expressions but will *not* be run through
  `configure_file` first at any point.
: By default, this is set to a file provided by IXM.

`COMMENT`
: Comment for the build system to display when executing Doxygen.
: By default this will be `"Generating documentation for target '${target}'
  with Doxygen ${DOXYGEN_VERSION}"`

### `target_doxygen_tagfile`

This command will add additional tag files to the provided doxygen target. Tag
files are used to set links to types that Doxygen might not be able to
understand (e.g., a tag file would allow documentation to link to
[cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/) when a type in the `std::`
namespace is found)

#### Required Parameters {#target-doxygen-tagfile-required-parameters}

`target`
: Doxygen target you wish to add tag files to.

`tagfile`
: Path to the tagfile

#### Keyword Parameters {#target-doxygen-tagfile/keyword}

`URL`
: The URL the tagfile will use as its base url.

> [!NOTE]
> Not all tag files will use a URL. Sometimes the paths can be *relative*. This
> is most useful when working within large interconnected projects, or projects
> with dependencies that might also generate Doxygen projects.

### `target_doxygen_extra_css`

Adds additional style sheets to the given doxygen target.

#### Required Parameters {#target-doxygen-extra-css-required-parameters}

`target`
: Doxygen target you wish to add style sheets to

#### Keyword Parameters {#target-doxygen-extra-css/keyword}

`INTERFACE` | `PUBLIC` | `PRIVATE`
: These properties work like you would expect them to for any other
`target_<command>` function found in CMake.
> [!NOTE]
> There is no actual `INTERFACE` property equivalent at this time for the
> Doxygen property, and transitive linking does not work with this target type.

## Properties

Only a few IXM specific properties are discussed here in detail, as IXM also
takes a page from CMake's book and uses the same names for properties as would
be found in a doxygen configuration file. e.g., `DOXYGEN_RECURSIVE` will set
the `RECURSIVE` value inside of the generated Doxyfile. For a full list of all
possible configuration names (and their default values), see [Doxygen's
Configuration Documentation](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/config.html)

`DOXYGEN_WORKING_DIRECTORY`
: The directory that Doxygen will execute from. By default, this is the
  `SOURCE_DIR` of the target

`DOXYGEN_CONFIGURATION_FILE`
: Path to the configuration file to use. By default this is set to the file
  that is generated by IXM via `add_doxygen_target`.

`DOXYGEN_TARGET_DEPENDENCIES`
: Additional targets that *must* build prior to the given doxygen target.
